[Music]
hey there's a saying that goes people's
opinions are like belly buttons everyone
has one so true it's part of what makes
us individuals adds variety to life but
have you ever wondered if your beliefs
are really your own what if it was put
there by someone else without you even
noticing it whew
strap in folks this is gonna be a deep
one yeah don't worry I'm not gonna get
all existential on you but the question
popped up in my head the other day as I
was scrolling through my feet i sat
there certain as the sky is blue that no
ad or news piece changes the way I think
or makes me want to buy something I mean
think about it
if I know that a commercial or sponsored
social media post is designed to
manipulate how I think about something
then how could it work plus do you even
pay attention to ads we all skip up so I
started digging and I was shocked when I
found out all the tricks the commercial
media uses to influence us the crazy
thing is many of the techniques rely on
our own minds participation and most of
them have been around for a long time
there's this thing psychologists call
the sleeper effect and it's been
observed since the late 1940s this is
where you get a piece of information
that sounds like it could be true at
first but you dismiss it as soon as you
notice that it's likely just biased
propaganda
however psychologists found that after
some time despite being perceptive
enough to know better
when first presented with a message
people yes that means you and me come to
accept it why in a nutshell
if the initial message is strong enough
the message will stick in our minds
longer than the source even when we
wrote the source off as unreliable
you know those quotes you see in ads for
a movie with giant bald
this says something like the best film
of the summer he ever bothered to notice
who said it I almost always do because
well I consider myself a pretty
observant guy that can't be fooled
I may even roll my eyes when I notice
that the person quoted works for the
same company that made the movie of
course he said that he's just trying to
sell me a ticket
still that Friday night when a friend
asked me if I saw that new dinosaur
movie I'll find myself saying something
like no but I hear it's great just
before I step up to the ticket window
and say - for Jurassic jaws part 8
please and the big surprise it was not
the best movie of the summer see what I
mean
then there's the framing effect which is
all about perception
after all language can be tricky and
when it comes to how we want someone to
think about something it's not always
about what we say but how we say it the
way something is framed can affect
everything from how we interpret a story
in the news to what shampoo you decide
to buy you're a lot more likely to buy a
product that's 90% effective than one
that's 10 percent effective right and
what about 80% lean beef sure sounds
better than 20% fat beef you see the
power of language is pretty much
everywhere when one person sees an old
beat-up
wardrobe others call it an antique and
here's an interesting statistic I read
people are more likely to react to the
word overpayment than the word discount
one study found that 93% of people check
in for a flight earlier when they know
they must pay more for checking in later
yet only 67% check in earlier when
there's a discount for early check-in
see this stuff even affects our behavior
so have you ever heard of the Semmelweis
reflex before I started looking into all
this I hadn't either but I knew the gist
I just didn't know it had a name until
now basically this is where we just see
what we want to see and hear what we
want to
it's named after a Hungarian doctor
named Semmelweis who came to the
shocking discovery that by washing his
hands his patients tended to you know
not get sick or infected when he
presented this to his colleagues and
suggested that they washed their hands
too they rejected his idea due to a lack
of scientific evidence they're strongly
instilled belief was that a gentleman's
hands couldn't transmit disease sheesh
well that was way back in 1846 and we've
come a long way since that still dr.
Semmelweis his story doesn't end well
and hand-washing didn't become
commonplace for another hundred years so
what does this have to do with how mass
media can control our minds easy we're
bombarded with so many sources of
information every day our brain chooses
to digest the ones that fit in with the
expectations and beliefs we already have
we become less likely to accept any new
knowledge that contradicts what we're
convinced we already know therefore we
watch the same channels visit the same
websites and trust the same sources
check it out a fan of Megan Markel can
look at a picture of her and think wow
isn't she just the epitome of perfection
her critics however will focus on the
wrinkles in her dress and think up she's
always so unkempt those people must be
blind but that's just my biased opinion
basically we see what we want to see
because that makes us feel like our
opinion is verified now when something
terrible happens to lots of people it's
a statistic when it happens to one
person it's a tragedy
this is called the identifiable victim
effect and it colors how we process
everything from world news to public
policy it happens because a story about
one specific person is more persuasive
and relatable than one that involves a
bunch of stats and data in 2007 a group
of researchers gave two groups of
participants $5.00 and a questionnaire
the first groups questionnaire began
with a message
of convincing statistics about a
population of a country and its people
in need of assistance
the second group received a
questionnaire that contained the picture
of a small child that noted their life
would be changed for the better as a
result of your financial gift each group
was then asked if they'd like to donate
a portion of their five dollars well no
surprise here
the first group donated an average of
23% while the second doubled this and
gave 46 percent now anchoring is a
pretty useful trick too it's something
we all do and smart advertisers
marketers and sales people know it and
use it all the time it's where we create
a bias based on the first piece of
information we get and rely a little too
much on that anchor before we get to the
rest of the boat tick Instagram for
example you can take a picture of
something or someone crop a piece of it
and present that part as the whole you
know like that's selfie where it looks
like you're out in the woods on an
adventurous camping trip but if we zoom
out we see you're just standing near a
few trees and bushes and your neighbor's
backyard but that wouldn't get as many
likes now would it in marketing terms
it's where we're presented with a high
price for something first establishing
our bias of what the thing costs and
then it's presented with a great deal at
a lower price like that coat you tried
on that looks perfect on you as a price
tag that says $500 and the salesperson
tells you it's on sale for $150 who sold
then the season goes by and you see the
same coat on a clearance rack for 50
bucks
yep that's the anchor effect now one of
the slickest tricks is how the
commercial media knows we all understand
the power and influence it has over us
sure it happens to everyone else but me
come on I'll say it before and I'll say
it again I'm too smart for that this is
where we run into the third person
effect we separate ourselves from
everyone else and in the process
increase our own self esteem believe it
or not it's likely that the more someone
believes they're in cape
of being influenced the more vulnerable
they are to it weird right
that must mean I'm super gullible but
think about it if none of this stuff
work and I know my mind can't be shaped
by someone else
why would companies be spending so much
time energy and money on trying to
influence because it works look I
totally get it
you start down this rabbit hole and
watch a video about how our minds and
decisions are being affected without our
consent and it can seem like a real
downer well we're just all pawns in
these corporations games of manipulation
but come on this is the bright side not
the Debbie downers what I'm saying is
simply being aware of these things gives
us more control over our minds it's
called having a healthy skepticism for a
reason
emphasis on the healthy and of course
making the informed decision to always
stay up to date on the bright side
certainly doesn't hurt either
so now let's hear from you how have you
noticed the media influence on you or
your friends let me know down in the
comments if you learned something new
today then give this video a like and
share it with a friend but hey don't go
swallowing the media's nonsense just yet
we have over 2000 cool videos for you to
check out all you have to do is pick the
left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life
[Music]